Time has no scale. The reason we experience time in the scale we do and the reason we think the universe is as old as it is is because we measure it in rotations of our earth around our sun. In other words, the universe is not old at all. Old is a relative time to the length of time of one rotation of our earth around our sun. And by extension, an individual's lifespan. This is not necessarily a good place to begin a scientific inquiry into the study of the universe from a position that has nothing to do with humans. And if one thing is for certain that science has uncovered, it has found that this universe was not created or does exist-for us, whatever your bent.

The implications of this are far reaching. But for one, take the concept of 'life' outside of this biosphere. Another thing we have discovered about this universe is the theory by which humans have developed on this planet from less complex forms of life: evolution. If this is to be take as a global process that can be applied in general off the earth, which it can be because the entire universe operates in a evolving way, then there is no reason to believe that other forms of phenomenon that we would identify as 'life' (if we were to simply broaden our perspective on what that is) then it follows that those other forms would not be bound to the same time scale to which we are.

This then throws a giant destructive wrench into the totality of science fiction that pertains to aliens and the general idea that humans have about contacting extraterrestrial life. There is absolutely no reason to believe aliens (for short) haven't come and gone from our system so fast that we simply couldn't detect them because our instruments when they came did not have the resolution to perceive the phenomenon. Or, they could be sending a signal to us in a phase that is too high or low to be detected, because our time scales are not reconcilable.

But, you say. Obviously, a civilization of advanced enough technology to come here or send us a signal at all would of course make this adjustment for our benefit. This is, unfortunately, a combination of several assumptions. One, that aliens use what we call technology at all. Two, that they have any incentive to anything for our benefit or that they even have interest in contacting us at all. Three, that they have sufficient technology in our terms to both travel the cosmos AND control time. Its just a set of massive assumptions designed to make the prospect of contacting aliens promising to satisfy a human need and nothing more than that. Scientifically speaking, and realistically speaking, there is no need for these assumptions, except to make us feel better and it is not based on any reasoning worth the... time.