There is no better teacher of the ways of the world and the reality in which we find ourselves for the general public than the saturation of stories either from books, graphic novels, or movies. These media incite such visceral emotions and understanding on certain topics about that no amount of education can outweigh them. Or, this is apparently so, because the casual opinion of the general public on certain topics seems to be not so much individually carved out in a person’s thinking space as their own work than it is perfectly molded and voiced by the media that saturates our lives.

Take the subject of time for example. This concept is so taken for granted by most people, including scientists, that not even the simplest of logical conclusions are part of scientific conversations. Talking to almost anyone about the subject of time will reveal in them the glaring fact that they have not put the least bit of thought into it at all, and have simply relied on their common sense, conventional education, and the regurgitation of common ideas to inspire their opinions of how time works.

One source of misinformation that cannot be ignored, but often is, is the science fiction culture that saturates our reading and movie-going lives. These movies often rely heavily on subjects of science and physics to tell their stories, but unfortunately Hollywood simply isn’t all that concerned with being scientifically accurate in its portrayal of futuristic deep space missions or alien encounters. What’s worse, is that in the case of most people of the general public, this is the most influential source of information they have on these subjects. Everyone likes to claim that it’s ‘just entertainment/fiction’ and that everyone clearly knows it. But I think that we are just reluctant to admit how influential these media are on the general public (including and especially the lawmakers who decide what actual scientific research to pursue) when it comes to certain subjects of science and physics. Even if the intention is not to learn about physics when watching a movie like Gravity (2013), it cannot be said that it has zero influence on any given person’s innate understanding of how gravity works in low earth orbit, angular momentum, orbital mechanics, or the operations of NASA in general, even in the slightest of——but very important——ways. And given the way that movie was produced, many misguided ideas have now seeped into the general public’s collective unconscious understanding of the nature of gravity in space. (Of course, no one will admit this fact.)

.

In the modern world, with the advent of computing well underway, and the prospects of deep space exploration seemingly just out of our reach, ideas of contact with alien species are enormously popular. A single year apparently cannot go by without some addition to the science fiction alien-action-movie sub culture anthology that currently exists. But what are these movies (or just these stories in general) implicitly teaching the general public about scientific concepts? What is the take-away for a world population exposed to the same type of story on a given subject told over and over? Just a conversation with average people on the subject of future alien encounters is telling enough to realize that they do not argue with what they are shown on the screen or read in a science fiction novel.

If asked, many people would understandably describe our encounters with aliens in much the same way, and it usually always goes something like this. 

#

Aliens have advanced technology and travel to our planet or send us a message and make contact.

In the case of malevolent aliens, they attack us with vehicles that look like something we would build, and are ultimately defeated by the will of the human spirit.

This case is not as interesting because laying out a model for extraterrestrial contact is not the point of the movie. However, the aliens still always have some form of compatible biology with our own and function much like either a human, or some other recognizable species to us, would, just slightly different.

In the case of benevolent aliens, they have advanced their society and their morality beyond the barbaric habits of us present humans on earth and have colonized the galaxy with their magical, albeit recognizable, advanced technology and good will toward other species like us.

They make contact and proceed to communicate with various human people central to the story. They ultimately have biological bodies much like our own and communication methods that are compatible in some way with our human protagonists.

#

Given what we understand about evolution, there are a number of assumptions in this very common pattern that just shouldn’t be present. And the real issue is that no one seems to notice.

For one thing, we don’t have any valid reference point for how life as we know it fits into the grander scheme of phenomena in this universe. We don’t have the perspective to understand how common or special the events on Earth, as it relates to life, are in relation to other ‘interesting phenomena’ somewhere else in the cosmos. Meaning: our reference point is ourselves and our perspective is narcissistic. This is just not a very good starting point for any kind of enterprise like ushering in a new age of advanced space exploration with the possibility of contact with other ‘life’ out in the void.

Evolution has taught us a few things about ourselves and our relation to other life on this planet that speaks loads with regard to this common story we tell ourselves, but unfortunately the implications of these facts just haven’t percolated to the surface of the cultural froth of human soup. For example, we know that all life on this planet ultimately has a single ancestor. There is only one source of all the evolutionary branches that exist today. The implications on our reference point for asking the question ‘What is life?’ from this fact are enormous. Life, at its root, is a singularly unique phenomena… even on Earth.

Understand what I mean. I’m saying that the phenomena of life (that we use as a yard stick wth which to judge the value of other phenomena in the rest of the cosmos) is so unique even on the Earth as to have only a single origin. Life, as we know it, is literally a singular event, even on the Earth. And here we are with the expectation that it would have occurred on a separate planet. It would be one thing if there were several if not a hundred individual origins of life that all developed into their own rich, parallel evolutionary trees on Earth. This would imply that life as we know it is a common occurrence. But the truth is that it is so uncommon at its base (I cannot stress enough that I’m only talking about life on Earth) that all ancestral lines drawn from everything we consider ‘life’ converge on a single living phenomenon. Life literally only burst into existence one, single, solitary, time. The resulting explosion of variety we see today masks how unique and singular the phenomenon of life of which we are a apart really actually is.

This is remarkable, when you think about it. It lays waste to our assumptions that life on other planets might have evolved in a similar way to here on earth. If life is common enough to have happened on different planets, wouldn’t it be obvious that there would be nothing stopping it from happening more than once per planet? But for some reason, the only evidence we have for life, upon which we base all other guesses for the probability on other planets, was somehow and for some reason restricted to only happening a single time within the bounds of our initial observation. This makes life perfectly unique even on Earth. And if it’s so absolutely unique even here, what gives us any indication, really, that life as we know it would spring up on an entirely different planet with entirely different initial conditions?

This places life as we know it remarkably low on the list of phenomena likely to occur. Furthermore, what it does is re-categorize us, or demote us in a way, to the position of only being an ‘interesting phenomenon’ among many possible phenomenon occurring in the cosmos. But again, there is no reason to believe or assume that just because it happened here, that it’s likelihood of occurring somewhere else is anything but zero, let alone the fact that we would be able to interact, communicate, or have a meaningful relationship with it. 

Our discussion of life on other planets is moving closer to a discussion of wishful thinking than anything else. What’s worse about this is that it’s real scientists doing real research who are talking in this way, ignoring the obvious facts before them, indulging in the idea that we are not a singular event throughout all the universe, and simply not expanding our search  wide enough for interesting phenomena beyond our own narcissistic interests. I think our culture of science fiction has a very real influence on this trend, even in the real field of cosmology. 

Now, I’m not saying there probably aren’t phenomena that are just as interesting or valuable, out in the cosmos, as we ourselves are, and everything we consider ‘life’ is. But my point is simply that we most likely wouldn’t even consider it ‘life’. It wouldn’t necessarily be ‘biological,’ it wouldn’t express ‘intelligence’ in any recognizable way (the way we want to recognize it), it wouldn’t need to have ‘society’ or ‘morality’ the way we know them, and ultimately, there isn’t any reason to assume it would even be organized into the ‘individuals-that-make-up-groups’ sociological hierarchy that most life here seems to follow.

The basic point is that when it comes to alien ‘life’ all the rules are thrown out the window and you need to have the most open mind that you’re severely limited human mind can produce. Evolution just did not do us any favors when it comes to thinking about these topics.

.

But let’s say we were to assume all of the preceding to be favorable for alien life. Even giving ground in these areas of our alien story telling (or actual research for the search for extraterrestrial life) does not really get us out of the woods. As it turns out (what is much worse for the case of the science fiction fan) there are several other obvious facts about reality that would almost perfectly hinder our ability to fulfill our ‘alien-contact bedtime story.’ 

First of all, there is absolutely no reason to assume that the reality outside our minds is a capable medium for supporting communication of different instances of ’life’ that have completely independent evolutionary histories. The issue is that as humans, all of the issues to overcome when communicating among ourselves: language, physicality, message encoding and decoding, signal medium, sensory inputs and outputs, sociology, thoughts, ideas, common mental conceptual models and landmarks, etc, are pushed through the tiny pin hole of the range of experiences that we all are capable and we all share. That is to say, we as humans can communicate with each other, no matter how different we may appear, because, at bottom, we all share so much in common, being the same species. We liken communication with aliens like communication with an individual from a different culture or language. 

The reality is that the only reason individual humans have any hope of meaningful communication is that we all generally occupy the same mental space. This is for a very simple and obvious reason. We all have the same hardware. Our physical brains are all working on the same level in some sense. Each one is based on the same structure; they each operate in the same basic way. In point of fact, if you come across someone that does not have a similarly functioning brain to your own, you declare them to be ‘mentally ill’ and your attempts at meaningful communication become severely diminished.

In the same way, if we come across another ‘interesting phenomenon’ with which we believe we could communicate, it necessarily wouldn’t have the same hardware as us. There would be scant many common landmarks in each our mental spaces to allow for any valuable communication (assuming, obviously, that ‘mental’ is even an adequate concept for the thing upon which this other phenomenon is based). The number of assumptions and things that must be taken for granted for our cherished alien contact stories to come to fruition is becoming insurmountable.

Our own study of neuroscience has revealed many simple realities of human experience and consciousness that very easily debunk the possibility of contact with anything that evolved outside of the ancestral evolutionary line that we exist in on the planet Earth. We have discovered in our study of the brain and consciousness that we essentially are experiencing a simulation of reality that is not particularly accurate with respect to the truths of the reality in which we live. From an evolutionary standpoint, we only understand our world to the point that (i.e. our brains have evolved only to the point that…) we could successfully survive long enough in our environment to reproduce. That’s the only requirement for us to flourish the way we have. That isn’t a high standard to meet. It’s a minimum, not a maximum. We have discovered that many of the things that we experience and believe based on common sense as inspired by our brains interpretation of the outside world are tacitly inaccurate, if not altogether false.

What this amounts to is our brains creating——out of thin air——a pleasant simulation for our conscious selves to experience, redacting and editing out any confusing, uncomfortable, or paradoxical truths about reality (what’s funny is that this system isn’t even good at doing that, given the number of visual and other conceptual illusions that we all suffer without reprieve). Our discovery of Quantum mechanics is a brimming example of everything our brains don’t tell us in our common experience. Quantum mechanics has been proved to be the most accurate physical theory of reality and yet several of its precepts are completely counterintuitive to our conscious experience. This should be astoundingly telling, remarkable, and humbling. The actual reality is a far different thing than our perceived reality. We literally make up the world  we know in our heads. The only reason any of us come close to agreeing on what we see out there is that the hardware producing the simulation in each of our individual cases is essentially a copy of some basic template. Change the hardware, change the perception. There is no reason to believe other consciousness would produce a compatible simulation to our own. 

What’s more, communicating among humans is endlessly strained in almost every single context in which it is necessary (as much as we have in common with each other). We have a hard enough time effectively getting our mental concepts translated properly in another’s head even with every advantage to such communication granted to us at no cost. Think of all the times you had a misunderstanding with someone with whom you later found out to have common ground. And that is the result of the best case scenario. Throw in an entirely separate basis for ‘life’ and a totally different evolutionary history, and you have to immediately throw out nearly every single platform upon which you can build the foundation of real communication.

.

Further still, if we assume that none of the above is an issue, if we assume that the actual physical reality and our perception of it are more adept to acting as a common medium between alien species than it in fact is, we still have an insurmountable problem to overcome before alien collaboration becomes tenable. When you objectively consider the implications of the way time really works in relation to the ways we as humans take it completely for granted, you start to see that trying to communicate with other ‘life’ in the cosmos is nearly impossible.

Again, referring to the common hardware that each of us humans are working with, the brain perceives the rate of time in the way that it does because of a small set of parameters in our environment. The earth rotates in certain, constant rate, and it orbits the sun at a certain, constant rate. This is the gauge by which our brains evolved to operate. Somehow, somewhere in the bubbling process of evolution of brains that resulted in the human brain, our sense of time was calibrated to these values. If the earth rotated at a different rate, our brains would experience time in a different rate. However, the interesting thing to notice is that it wouldn’t make much of a difference to us in that case, subjectively. It would just be the rate of time we experience and we would not feel it being faster or slower than anything. Our rate of time is ‘the’ rate of time, and so is the same from the perspective of an alien species. (Even if this doesn’t produce a physical impediment to communication, it at least produces an enormous pragmatic one as we would have to negotiate which rate to agree to use.)

Since we have no absolute yard stick for the scale of the rate of time, we have zero perspective on how our experience of time might fit into the spectrum of possible experiences of possible interesting ‘life’ phenomenon. This has immediate consequences for our prospect of collaboration with beings that evolved in a different environment entirely. Most likely, their planet would have a different rate of rotation and a different orbital period. Obviously then, they would literally experience reality in a different frequency, as it were. Their metabolism as such would be operating at a different rate, which impedes interaction immensely in obvious ways.

Take an example of a possible interaction, from beginning to end. We identify a phenomenon somewhere in the cosmos, and we attempt communication. Assuming we believe it’s life in the first place, we would have to assume that they have a similar simulation apparatus that our brains provide us and that their simulation would be compatible with our simulation (meaning: we have common conceptual landmarks and mental models shared between us that would facilitate communication at any level). Again, there is absolutely zero reason to assume these things. In fact, it’s far more likely that none of these things will be the case. But assuming they are, let’s continue. Next, we would have to communicate in a common language or be able to translate from one to the other, and visa versa. This assumes that the artifacts of our mental language would exist in this alien species mental space (again, unfortunately, assuming ‘mental’ in their case is even a viable concept at all).

But let’s say that all of this boils down to a problem of translating between languages much like a person from the US and a person from Japan would have to overcome the language barrier. We are still, even after assuming the entire problem would work out favorably up to this point, faced with the fact that this being we are trying to communicate with takes a breath every three days. In other words, they experience three ‘seconds’ in same period of time that we would call three ‘days.’ This is a totally reasonable situation to find ourselves in when dealing with extraterrestrials. Their planet rotates much slower than ours, so their consciousness has evolved to be calibrated to an experience in relation to that yard stick. Whatever the actual rate is, the likelihood of it being close to our own is miniscule. And any difference between the two would have disastrous affects on the prospect of communication between us. 

Given all the assumptions that it turns out we have to make in order to make this collaboration work, at the end of the day, we are faced with an essentially intractable problem, at base, with  discrepancy of rates of experience between each of our species. This means that even if we could communicate with them on a global scale (utopian global society needing to be assumed for that) individuals from each species could never individually interact with each other. The rate of information processing could turn out to be the ultimate barrier between us and our dreams of alien collaboration, communication, and learning.

.

Of course the science fiction genre has a an answer to all these critiques of the ‘happy alien-contact bedtime story.’ They simply explain most of them away by assuming that the alien species with which we make contact is advanced enough in their technology and society to make up the gulf between our species. The advanced tech allows them to communicate with us ‘in a way we would understand’ (a common trope in science fiction), and an advanced society (beyond the barbarism stage that humans still find themselves in, another common trope) makes them necessarily benevolent so that they find value in communicating with us in the first place instead of simply viewing us as an energy source and enslaving us.

Given the number of assumptions that need to be made for this story to make any sense to it’s human readers, it’s no wonder they’ve all boiled down to two basic assertions to cover all the bases. What I would like to get across however, is that we, as humans, are better than this. We are better then telling ourselves happy stories that are not grounded in reality, and then additionally not recognizing how far from reality they actually reside. We continue to fool ourselves in so many ways about how the world works and then proceed to be upset, disappointed, depressed, anxious, vengeful, and angry when they don’t actually work that way. And in the case of alien contact, we are getting closer and closer for some discovery in actual science to give us a whiff of this fairytale, and the inevitability of the global sigh of disappointment is palpable, given what we expect.


The science fiction community has failed everyone in this very important way. It has accomplished the education of a global human community of completely false possibilities with regard to aliens. Talking to almost anyone on this subject, you will immediately notice that they will fall lock-step in line with how these stories are told to us. They usually have not put any of their own thinking into the situation (which very easily reveals the truth of the matter without the assumptions) and just instead have taken every dimension of this historical event for granted. It’s fun to hope for the human species to one day be in collaboration with a species of similar life from another planet, but the likelihood of it happening in a practical sense is almost negligible.