Evolution is a subject known commonly to most people these days without having much of a science background, it's generally in the public consciousness. For the experts, its been known to us for roughly 160 years, and in that time, as it has been disseminated to the public, it's been a subtle misunderstanding between what the experts say, what they mean, what they know about relationship, and the unknown reasons they won't clarify the truth to the public better. All of this goes back to the beginning. Now, I don't blame Charles Darwin for getting a few things about the process inaccurate. If he felt like he wanted to frame certain aspects of the process certain ways because of his predilections, then I can't blame him for that in the time he lived. I do feel, however, that today's scientists should have modified the theory's language to improve how people understand things in today's modern thinking. I don't think there is anything new to discover about the theory, but I think a modern refurbishment of the language is called for, especially in light of what ended up happening (more on that later). All I'm offering is to align new language with a novel interpretation of the theory, which will make the theory more clearly understandable, and so no interpreting between the language and the theory is required. All of this might not seem like a big deal, just a bunch of language swapping from here to there, but there are a few implications from all of this that reach pretty far. We'll get to all that.


I wrote about evolution in my "extraterrestrial life" piece, but I thought this subject deserved it's own piece.  So here we are talking about evolution in all it's glory. And we'll get into a few other topics since we have the space. Always more to say. It's a deep enough subject for an evolutionary biologist with enough of a specialty to fill volumes, but we won't need to do that here to cover what I think is important. In fact I think evolution is a rather simple topic and can truly be fully understood without much detailed chemistry or genetics as the evolutionary biologists would generally have you believe. I think what they are doing is over analyzing and over doing chemical and genetic scientific studies and drawing abstract results that they will never be able to pin down so that their study ultimately comes to nothing but a lot of fancy chemistry, genetics, and statistics. The process of evolution is a macro process, and these scientists are attempting to apply micro scientific theories to the progression of chemicals and genes, and it simply doesn't make any sense. So beyond all the wasted evolutionary chemical and genetic research that goes on everyday, evolution as a macro process discussed in public by the experts and understood by the public (and understood by the experts for all I know), there remains a blinding misconception.  


The misconception about evolution is of a quality you've probably never even associated with it at all. Processes in general: actions, processes, mechanisms, etc. are qualified as either "active," where it requires an agent or actor, or "passive," where it operates automatically, by superseding laws, like those of physics. An example of an active process is hitting a home run, it requires a player to hit the ball (note, the agent doesn't have to be human). If it's passive, then the process is automatic, and is governed by some other set of forces, like gravity, a planet moving in its orbit is an example of a passive process.


The theory of evolution has been quoted in this simple form since its inception: "evolution by natural selection." This means that organisms with traits that give them an advantage in the environment survive, thus pass on their genes to subsequent generations, which is that they are then said to have undergone "natural selection." Now, I phrased that very forgivingly. It doesn't fully make my point about the misconception, but the term "natural selection" is still enough to mean "evolution is an active process" to people. It sounds like there is something selecting organisms for survival if their traits have an advantage. There's a more common way evolutionary biologist's have put it to the public in many forums that make it sound even more active, they abbreviate it so egregiously they may be single handedly responsibly for an entire religious movement that has little sight of going away anytime soon(more on this to come). They say something like "organisms with traits that give them an advantage in the environment are "selected" for survival" and I'll point it out here because it's important: it sounds as if something or someone is doing the selecting. This is even worse, it's more common, and it makes it sound even more active. The sentence is literally in the active voice. the  previous form, at least the sentence was in the passive voice. But either way you cut it, the use of the word, "selection," or "selected," implies action. It needs to be removed from evolutionary theory discussion. I'll get into the proper way to think about evolution in a bit, but first an important reason why all of this matters.



.



So, there's a particular religious movement you might have heard of closely related to evolution, on the middle ground somewhere between creationism and hard-science evolutionary study. Guessed it? It's called Intelligent Design. And I can't think of a better origin story for Intelligent Design than the taking advantage of the misconception of evolution being an active process. Intelligent Design is, of the two it has at it's disposal like Creationism it's the better, Christianity's young explanation for today's life. As the religious groups were dealing with the new science of evolution, they needed to figure out what to do. The more they came to understand the theory, they came to understand the term "natural selection," and where the scientists understand the subtlety of the difference between what they say and what they mean, where they don't literally mean that any selection is taking place, they don't, to this day, build it into the common language, The religious groups decided to simply take it literally and assume there was an agent at the heart of the evolution process making selection decisions, guiding the process. This "active language" of the theory of evolution created the opening for Intelligent Design to make a reasonable stand and start arguing their positions. It's exactly what they needed, they wanted evolution to be directed so that they could say that humans were an intended outcome of evolution and that God was the Intelligent Designer, using evolution to create all of his creation. In the Church's view, Charles Darwin had essentially discovered the method that God had brought his creation from Genesis to the modern day. 



If evolution had been spoken about as it truly is, in a passive way, then there would have been no space for Intelligent Design to create a position and make a movement for itself. Personally, this makes this misconception stand out to me. The misunderstanding is at the level of the public to such a high degree that everyone thinks it and it's plainly the fault of the actual scientists themselves. What's worse, as a result, there's a religious movement spreading misinformation, coupled with the numbers of religious in the world, and they've already got a saturation of subscribers, without even trying. They offer their easily believable fallacies and successfully confuse the public discussion. Intelligent Design as an idea is aims to undermine continuously what real evolutionary biologists are doing with the science by making claims about what they believe was "intended" rather than what the evidence is telling them. They actively campaign their ways of thinking using arguments with regular people on the street that they can't rebuttal, thus getting the people to question they're thinking on the topic and wonder if Intelligent Design philosophy is correct. It's remarkably easy to do, in fact.


They get someone talking and then start questioning them about how to evolve a human eye. The person will, being strong believers in Darwin Evolutionists, think it's obvious. The Host's first, main question (they think this is they're checkmate) is how do you get something so complex and intricate from something so macro and dull like evolution (they think). The person attempts to begin to explain, but approaches it the wrong way, coming at it from a story/evolution of features perspective, and they quickly realize they don't know the inner parts of the human eye all that well, and it's probably a bit more complicated if they did anyway. Couple this with the Intelligent Design Host asking questions every 5 seconds not letting the poor guy get a thought out. Dismantling any attempt he had at building a case. Ultimately the Host convinces that it's impossible to get a human eye, that it's too complex and specifically functional, you would need to design it, that evolution is too random and macro of a process to build something as specific as an eye. And the guy walks away questioning most of his Evolution beliefs. I've seen this supposed turn of beliefs happen in real time. Now, I know, don't believe everything you see on the Internet, the guy could have been a plant, he might have been a believer in Intelligent Design all along. But still it makes you think what's possible. 


Either way, the reality about the human eye is this, so if you're ever approached by anyone of the Intelligent Design flavor and they want you to explain to them how the human eye could have been evolved without a designer, here's your answer. It's rather simple. They claim that the Intelligent Designer is required to add features and put them in the right place. And that evolution can't do that. That's they're claim. We'll welcome to wrong world. Flat wrong world, so there's not much room. It all comes down to mutations. Say we have a population of amoebas with simple light reacting cells, and basically every generation, during reproduction, the genes aren't copied properly and there's a few minor mistakes, just simple chemistry. Nothing special about it. No special reason. Well what you probably never thought about those mutations is that they're basically adding information (complexity, novelty, that eventually become features) into the gene pool. If our genes didn't mutate, the population would just keep passing around the same genes and there would be no new information to evolve anything into. No mutation, no evolution. But anyway, we're injecting information into the population of amoebas and it's very simple set of cells can start gaining more features. Or the population gains two or three different features to it's light reacting cells. Then through the lifetime, some features allowed better survival then others. And then the next generation gets another mutation (read: additional complexity, another feature, especially at the simple cell organism level the growth would be high). With every generation, the complexity is increased.



#


So how did the eye get so complex?


Mutation equals new information in the DNA, so then it's complex simply because of millions of mutations over millions of years.


How does eye get designed without designer?


Some features benefit organism, lives, genes stay in pool: "add"


Some features detriment organism, dies, genes leave pool: "remove"


Add and Remove results are what "design" the eye

#



This is the process to get a complex thing like the eye, and it's completely passive too, it just happens. There was no need for a designer or watchmaker.




.




So back to our previous discussion about the active or passive nature of Evolution. Evolution has been described here as taking on an active form when in the public forum so that the public understand it to be an active process. In it's most egregious phrasing, as well, it takes on the active voice, which simply compounds the issue, obviously. And additionally we've talked about how this form phrasing has essentially led to a religious movement that without the active voice, would never have had the space to grow roots. So everyone thinks that Evolution is an active process. They think it is a forced mechanism applied to nature in some external sense, like someone somewhere is turning the dials. More importantly, it seems as though, they are waiting around and researching to find a better theory for how species change. 


The reality about Evolution is far more passive, cohesive, weighty, and significant. Evolution is a law of Nature. It's a property of the living system itself. When life is let loose in an organic environment, the evolution process can't NOT happen. When evolutionary biologists talk about selection, they usually know what they mean, and it isn't in an agent making a choice sense. While this may not be the literal way your average person takes it, this sense is somehow still disseminated to the public by the phrasing "natural selection." What they're referring to is genes surviving into the future of the gene pool, "selection" is effectively the state of existing in the next generation. To the experts, the environment is "selecting" the genes that continue to exist and those that are killed off. While this is true in a sense, if they want to say it this way, they have it backwards. The environment is really "selecting" which genes to "remove" from the gene pool, those that stay, "just happened" to survive, there is no action taken that marked they're survival like their counterpart organisms who died.  Take the example of the polar bear, they started as brown bears like all bears did at one time. Well, what was happening is that the bears that found themselves in 100% wintery climates and environments started having mutations that would lighten their fur ever so slightly. So then what would happen is that in a given generation, the population would be split between bears of all shades, and those bears that had fairer fur, closer to the color of the snow, would be less likely to be eaten a predator. Evolution is not performing any action on the part of the survival, the bears are simply not being killed. On the other hand, The bears with the detrimental traits, like the darker fur, they were actively being removed from the gene pool by being killed by predators, for example. This is the way evolution actually works, it does not reward good traits except in the sense of leaving them completely alone and letting them live their lives free and clear. They get no "you have good a fitness with the environment" award. However, have bad traits, and you are immediately punished. That's where the action is. We usually think of it backwards because we place the phrasing "natural selection" in the wrong place.


Evolution is truly more interested in removing organisms from the gene pool than adding them, and whatever survives, it doesn't care. This is the heart of the passive nature of Evolution. The survivors are not part of the evolution process, they are literally outside the system. You don't want to be touched by evolution, it usually means you're being selected for death. "Selection" would have been a way more appropriate word for the word that described the death of an organism and removal from the gene pool. It would have an "agent" (Death) right there and ready if any discussion of active/passive came up. There would be no problem having an passive Evolution process and an interpretive active death process called "Selection."


This is a very different picture than what you're used to seeing from the standard Evolution narrative: organisms compete for resources in an finite environment and those with disadvantageous traits die, while those with those with advantageous traits are "selected" for survival and their traits are passed on to the next generation after some mutation. While you may not have thought of it in this way, this is a description of an active process. There is an absent, missing, or phantom someone or something that's implied to be "selecting" the survivors in this story based on their advantageous traits. In fact, there is no activity happening to the survivors of Evolution, they simply aren't dying. Nothing could be more passive. What's actively happening is that organisms are being killed by the environment. But this technically isn't an "active" process because there is no agency behind the Death process. It's just a law of nature, it's as passive a process as gravity. Therefore making the new interpretation, given above, centered on the deaths of the organisms in the Evolution process, rather than the survivors, you make that interpretation passive rather than active, and remove the phantom Agency that had been misguidedly been added to Evolution by the experts since the discovery of Evolution by Charles Darwin, and which was never modified by modern scientists unfortunately.


So hopefully, you've taken from this a better understanding of how to view Evolution. That it's not the active process you might have thought it was, and that it is in fact, much more subtle of a process than you might have believed. If you have any questions about Evolution in general or how to deal with the Intelligent Design movement specifically, post to our Facebook page. Would love to hear from my readers.