The science fiction genre has been telling us stories about extraterrestrial life for over a century. Stories that range in topic from your basic first contact story to armed battle conflict, human origin stories, stories where aliens share their advanced technology with us (to the usual overall betterment of humanity--e.g. Star  Trek), and large scale intergalactic wars and politics (e.g. Isaac Asimov's The Foundation series). Either the aliens making contact are here for Earth's resources and want to annihilate the indigenous species (us) to get them (Independence Day), or (as people actually believe happens, like the very real culture surrounding the supposed Area 51 in New Mexico) they want to secretly abduct humans for study. In other common Sci-Fi scenarios, aliens have laid seeds (DNA) that burgeoned all life Earth, and they have either returned to make contact (Mission to Mars [2000]) or the story follows what happens to the "engineers" after they have seeded the planet and humans catch up to them (Prometheus and Alien: Covenant). 

Another very common trope in Sci-Fi depicts aliens in full tilt worship and homage to the human race as being the greatest thing in the cosmos. The human spirit, they revere, is the shining light to which they themselves aspire. With all their technology, space exploration, and apparent communing with countless species throughout the galaxy, these aliens cherish human's capacity for love and their never ending guile and spirit to push on in the face of unfavorable conditions as the most valuable thing in the cosmos.

There are a couple of common threads that persist through all these tropes. They have been reinforced so much over the last century of the genre, that you can no longer get away from using a few of the basic ones in your Sci-Fi story if you want it to be taken seriously--however scientifically off base they may be. For one, all of these stories assume that aliens organize themselves into societies and civilizations just like us humans do. Think of any movie you've seen about alien contact, they come in a big ship and they either walk out or fly out individually just like a group of people would. 

This is very suggestive.  It implies several characteristics, features, and traits of the alien species without even breaking a sweat. It suggests that they must relate to each other by communicating through some means (not necessarily speech, they are aliens after all, tsk, tsk), which means these creatures have some form of social behavior. They are independently intelligent, you can interact with one individually, so they must have individual identities like you or I. This by itself has enormous implications that no one takes into consideration, not even most scientists. What does it mean for a creature to have a personal identity? (More on this later). They also collectively form a civilization, conveniently like ours most of the time. This is the culmination of individuals mixed with social behavior at a high level. So implying that aliens too have civilization, means you're claiming that the alien species has personal identity and engages in social behavior on all levels up to and including the civilization. 

.

This does not just come from Sci-Fi. Prominent scientists have thought this way throughout the 20th century, much to my personal chagrin. People like Enrico Fermi, an otherwise respected Physicists, went on to make statements about extraterrestrial life and to coin a paradox centralized around the lack of evidence for alien life in the face of such high estimates for the existence of such life. The problem with Fermi was that he framed his entire through process about alien life around alien civilizations, their development of technology, and their progression into a space exploring species. It doesn't sound like there's anything wrong with this line of thinking on the surface, but when you think about it, why would aliens have civilization? Where would they get the idea of technology, like we do? Are these ideas universal? Do we have the data to support that these ideas are inevitabilities and not just outliers? More on that later. What's unfortunate about Fermi's work is that it has influenced a generation of scientists who don't question what they hear from people like Fermi.

Another scientific group that has influenced a generation of the general public is the group that developed the Drake Equation. The Drake equation, headed up by Dr. Frank Drake, is a probabilistic equation that includes 6 probabilities for factors that would lead to the existence of alien civilizations we may communicate with. The problem is right in the intent of the equation. It's trying to find alien "civilizations" for us to communicate with. When looking at the individual terms for the equation, more problems surface. 


Drake Equation
N = R*p*n*L*I*c*T

R = rate of start formation
p = fraction of stars that have planets
n  = of starts that have planets, planets that can potentially support life
L = fraction of those planets that actually develop life
I = fraction of planets bearing life that intelligent, civilized life,  has developed
c = fraction of those civilizations that have developed communications 
	i.e. technologies that release signals into space 
T = length of time that those signals have been released into space

[c] = https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drake_equation


Most of the first few terms aren't problematic, but when you get down to the intelligent life terms and the phrase "civilized life" enters the mix, you start to see the extraordinary bias these scientists had toward their own world and way of living, without any regard for what was possible outside the human or earth system.  

.

More specifically, to address the suggestions from Sci-Fi and these scientists,  let's look at why they are such a problem. To quickly reiterate, Sci-Fi and many scientists claim consistently that aliens would be organized into a civilization, which heavily suggests several things. It suggests that they are social the way we are, which suggests aliens have a personal identity, meaning they have a sense of self, which literally means they would need a physical image in their "brain" of a self, equivalent to the image of the self that we possess. So why are these such a problem? First of all for an alien to have the same type of thing as a "self" it would need a human brain. But it can't have one of those. It can't it's own "brain," but drawing any analogy between ours and theirs is a stretch. So an alien with a self is a tall order. Which crumbles the whole edifice, all the way up  to civilization, from the bottom. But granting that it has some analogy to our brain, why can't aliens have a sense of self, an identity? Why can't they be social? It seems so natural that they would be, that these are universal characteristics of life. I mean, look around. So many species on earth have identities, senses of selves. They are social, they communicate. Obviously, these are universal traits of life, right?

Probably not. Or at least, think about it one more time. All of life on this planet is related. We all draw our evolutionary roots back to a single ancestral species. Even though it appears that there is a vast diversity of life on this planet, there is in fact only one single solitary form of life on this planet. There is one data point. Whatever characteristics we have as humans (brains, selves, identities, ids, social behavior, civilization, the frontal cortex, etc.), and whatever characteristics we share with other species, it's only counted once. And it's only counted on Earth. It doesn't apply to any other evolution that happens on any other planet.

But before we get into that, let's talk about these characteristics of humans that we keep lazily applying to aliens as if they were universal. We seem to do it without even noticing. So first of all, do you notice in your own experience, that you have an identity? That you can think about "yourself" as distinct from the "thinker". This is called the "self" or the "id". In neurological terms it's an image that your neurons create inside your brain that give other parts of your brain the impression that a "person" exists and this person is the owner of the brain and the body. As a side effect, a vastly infinite internal world is created inside your head that no one else has direct access to where you can have whatever other "image" (thought) you wish (sometimes ones you don't wish). And this creates a separation between the mental space "you" occupy (the "self", the inner world) from the "real" external world. It causes in us this feeling like we aren't part of nature but are "unnatural" like we have been placed here mistakenly. The literature movements of the 18th and 19th centuries prove this feeling exists in us at a base level in their title of "Man vs Nature". When in fact, it is indisputable from a scientific and evolutionary point of view that man is identical to nature. The feeling is an impression of the side effect of our possession of the image of the "self" as a result of biological evolution. 

Now, you may ask, why do we have the self? A lot of people think (because they don't do much of it) that we have it as a result of having a soul, or because evolution completed it's goal of reaching it's zenith with the human and the  self was it's greatest creation--that any evolution process will inevitably result in the production of a self for it's superior species. This is how most people think, sadly. But there are two things wrong with that last statement. Evolution produces nothing that was inevitable, and it does not produce superior species. These are probably shocking statements for most people who haven't had much exposure to real evolution study. Unfortunately, evolution is a very misunderstood process in the general public.

.

Evolution is a process that hones species for the current or changing environment, it cares not for superiority, it cares not for goals. It's extraordinarily simple, passive, and natural. All that's happening is that organisms with traits that are not suited for the environment that they are in die, thus, their genes leave the pool and are not passed on. And organisms that survive the environment live, thus, keeping those genes in the pool and they are passed on. As an added bonus, during reproduction, mistakes are made when copying the DNA, which really means that novel genetic information is constantly being injected into the gene pool. Which translates to traits getting more and more complex with each passing generation. This is the answer to how the Eye is so complex. Mutations would add variety to the eye structure, several would die out, but one or two would survive, then the next generation, another mutation would add more complexity and more functionality. Over millions of years, mutations coupled with selection created the functioning eyes we have today. No need for an Intelligent Designer.     

So evolution didn't set out to produce a human that would walk on two legs with a brain that would be social and would be part of a civilization, etc.. It didn't set out to produce a human that would have a sense of self, that would have a vastly infinite inner world that was separate from the outer world, that would make the human feel like a guest on it's own planet. 

All evolution was doing was letting certain primates die when they couldn't hack the environment anymore and mutating the genes of other primates giving them randomly different traits in a game of trial and error to see what would survive the best. It just so happened that having the primate walk on two legs seemed to work, so that stuck. Then (forgive the timeline, I'm not claiming knowledge of anthropology, it's not important here) a mutation caused suddenly an image to form in the brain of the advanced primate walking on two legs. This new image ripped it out of the autopilot the animal was in up to that point and put it squarely in the autonomous driver seat.  It now had a sense of itself, it had perspective on the world around it.  It could negotiate the world, plan long term, think complex abstract thoughts, see the others around it, take care of them better, for the betterment of itself and the group, all from within the infinitely vast inner world created by the newly created image of the "self" that a random mutation bestowed upon it. And with this self, the advanced primate was more likely to survive, by pure happenstance. But it didn't have to be that way. This is what people forget.

The introduction of the self, in the evolutionary timeline of human development could very well have been a misstep that led to our species' extinction. But we are lucky enough that it led to its flourishing. We take it for granted. We take it so much for granted that when we imagine other species evolving on other planets, we imagine them going through the exact same steps of evolution that we went through. But that is mathematically improbable. And I would really like to say "literally impossible," but the mathematician in me refuses to mislead my audience with absolutes I know I can't claim. (It's theoretically possible, but the odds are most likely 1 in more than 10 times the number of atoms in the universe, so it's impossible, there I said it)

Over the course of the millions and billions of  years of evolution that it takes to result in a species with "intelligence," the number of mutations that compound make it virtually impossible that any sequence of traits would be repeated from one closed evolutionary system to another.

.

So you may be asking, why does all this matter so much? Why did I write this long piece trying to explain how aliens won't have selves. Who cares? Well, I wouldn't have any issue with Sci-Fi telling stories that make no sense about aliens communing with humans the way we deal with other countries in the United Nations, if it didn't influence the science of how we think about extraterrestrial life and evolutionary biology so much. Science Fiction is a very powerful genre. It speaks to our inner child in such a strong way that we are very reluctant to give the stories up. It influences everybody, even scientists, so much so that the direction of research is changed as a result of what these scientists believe is the right way to take the research. So if they believe the right thing to look for is alien civilizations then they will look for that, and if the reality is that there is no such thing because all of our thinking has been misguided for half a century, then we would have wasted decades of scientific research that could have otherwise been put to good use. The same goes for what the general public thinks in the public consciousness. What they think matters, and when they believe certain things, those things influence what gets funding for scientific research ultimately.  

What I've found when bouncing these ideas off of people in the general public is a great deal of push back. And it was a great deal puzzling to me for a long time why what I considered well formed arguments were being treated with such vitriol and distain. People really hated what I had to say, they really thought I was off my rocker. And I finally realized what may have been going on. In a way, what we are looking for out of science fiction, the Fermi Paradox, and the Drake Equation is ourselves. The civilization, the implied identity, self, technology, space program, etc. are all features and traits of the human race. We seem to want validation that we aren't just a random aberration, that our traits are universal in this cosmos. We want to know that other processes of evolution on other planets would produce similar results to us, so we aren't strange, weird, or alone. We need to believe this. It's not just a question on our mind or a curiosity, it's a need for us to believe that we are not alone. It's a longing. We hope to find compatriots out there in the cosmos who think like us, act like us, behave like us, and are civilized like us. And here I am trying to argue that we are necessarily alone in the cosmos, that it is impossible for evolution to ever recreate something similar to what it created on planet Earth.

But I think there's integrity in the opposite. We are a flash in the pan. There is nothing that will be like us again. And it's not in any spiritual sense that I make that statement, it's in a very grounded evolutionary sense that I can say that. We are singular and special. Humans will never be replicated. Our traits will never be copied: our identities, our selves, our civilizations, our social behavior, our intelligence. The only thing we can ever say about alien life for sure is that it will be "some form of matter that behaves in a manner that is slightly non-random." Beyond this, no other realistic definition can be applied. 

And that is the best opening line to a Sci-Fi story I think I've ever heard.