I think through a thought till I get to the end, but then when I think of it, and I know that I don't.

Instead of the end I come to a bend, and around it I go, expecting to see absolutely nothing exceptionally new. But instead though, off to the side, casually, leaning with formidable standing so actually, I see you.

Your smirk says too much and your eyes say too little, your posture assertive and your nose in the middle. My previous thought has been clearly forgot, for the moment I'm struck by the alien sight, I ponder if talking would be something I might, but as far as I know, I'm here for a reason, I need something to show, so I dare not take flight from the purpose remembered that was to get to the end of this thought with the bend as a plight.

As I go my own way which inevitably takes me past you leaning there so cursorily, I casually ask if you have any advice for a fellow like me in this strange curvy land. You give me no notice but seem to consider something to tell me that might assist me off hither. You look up at me prime, with eyes worth a dime, and you tell me the following in a dark familiar rhyme.

"Before you reach what you seek, this 'thought with an end,' be warned now that you will first see a bend. Truth is that it circles back on itself. It does this in the most deceiving of ways, it will make you think progress the complete and total way, but I tell you right now, that static it stays"

Her prophesy done she resumed her cool stance, and nothing about her signaled a chance to say anything further, lest like a fool I should dance.

I went on my way to what end I knew not, certainly not on this path, as it was like a knot. Whatever I did, I continued to think for a bit little longer, around no more bends did I even dare wonder. Slowly I tried to forget the end I was seeking, I started confusing the direction for the taking. I was getting lost in this place, and as for the thought, I eventually got distracted and totally forgot.

I was free of the cycle of thinking thoroughly through the thought that tricked me and got me askew. If I had not met you, in that maze of that world, of an inner man’s struggle to become something new, then I’d still be trapped there twirling around, like the dance of a fool who is wearing a crown.

That thought and its vicious confusing attacks of deceit and temptation for receipt of some closure the thinker does seek has been all but forgot. Apart from the nausea from circles abound, I did manage to see something there I was glad to have found, and while I think my mind conceives against me some sort of elaborate thinking plot, I was saved by an oracle, you I forgot not.