As humans, we cherish intelligence more than anything. We prop it up as the highlighting trait that defines us as different and superior to any other living thing. We are the 'most intelligent' blobs of matter in existence as far as our objective eyes can tell us. And we fear to the core of our bones something that is more intelligent than us, either man-made machines that will poetically destroy us or super intelligent and malignant extraterrestrials that will annihilate or enslave us.

All this fervor over that precious thing called 'intelligence.'

But what is intelligence? If you even ask the question, one might surmise that you have it. Are there other questions one can ask that prove one's intelligence? Are there any actions someone can perform to prove they have the magic?

What about language? Sure, if you can speak, you are intelligent. Ok, so a barking dog is intelligent, that's communication and language, right? Well sort of. Sort of? What do you mean? I have to define the threshold of language that constitutes intelligence? So now we're a full step, and an entire field of study, away from defining the thing we want to define. But for now, we can say that the dog is only a little intelligent, then? Right, only a little bit. So there are degrees? Right.

Ok, let's try something else. What about decision making. What if I decide to raise my right hand. Is that intelligent? Well, a computer can decide between two options pretty easily, and it's not intelligent like a human, so that doesn't count. Wait, so only intelligence like a human counts? This is beginning to sound rigged.

.

It has been said that the less we know about a topic the more books are written about it. We know a whole lot about gravity, so authors don't waste their time trying to define, categorize, understand, explore, or bank on the general ambiguity of what gravity is and its implications. Because there is no ambiguity. Or at least far less than its polar opposite topic of discussion which is intelligence.

Every year, hundreds of books on intelligence are published that you can buy in the fledgling brick-and-mortar book stores or online. Books on the mysteries of the definition, taxonomy, implications, and artificially imbued instances of intelligence are produced, each one in the hopes of answering the ultimate question. What is intelligence.

We know we have it, we know other things don't have what we have. We can simulate some behavior we think is intelligent in artificially created entities, but we have no idea what it is. We aren't even close.

.

There are things related to intelligence that we know fairly certainly. So certainly that they are defined by short sentences in a dictionary and have a nearly negligible number of books written about them in all of history.

Insight is a good example. People understand what insight is fairly well. It's the ability to read between the lines, or make an observation that is not immediately obvious if taking the available information literally. There are no musings by researchers, scientists, theologians, or scholars about its definition, implications, or level of degree.

From my personal experience, I have been called both highly intelligent and very insightful. The former is a precarious thing to pin hopes to, I can tell you, because pure intelligence does not matter much if you can't apply it. And relying on it in the absence of social skills (read: experience) will cause you to fail very quickly. I learned this lesson after finishing grad school, and I couldn't land a job to save my life.

Intelligence was possible, but it took the right circumstances and hard work to tease it out, so it wasn't really there. Insight, however, was always easy and free. And it required no experience to wield it. Experience teaches me the moral and practical implications of when and how to wield it, but its a powerful thing that I have access to without much effort.

So here we have two traits, intelligence and insight. One is very simply, well defined, and understood. The ship has sailed. It's so effortlessly demonstrated that you can't not demonstrate it. It's reliable and will always work. The other has an infinitely murky definition that fills tomes, many of them. It does not happen naturally, and takes work to elicit properly. It does not guarantee success, even though the story of our species pins all the success we have and will have on it. And it's not reliable, one will not always be able to demonstrate intelligence all of the time.

.

So, if we know what insight is, is there anything concrete we can really say about intelligence? Possibly. The major difference between insight and intelligence seems to be the relative complexity of phenomenon that can constitute each. This is what we're really talking about. Intelligence avoids a hard definition because we seem to lack the lexicon or even conceptual basis as humans to pin it down. This is an unfortunate limit to human capability, in the modern age of science, there seem to be a number of fields of study that are just so complex that our human conceptual understanding of them is pushed to it's limit. Quantum Mechanics and String Theory are two other notable examples.

So if intelligence is very complex and insight is very simple. There seems to be a hierarchy at play here. One may lead to the other. One may be the building block, or irreducible unit of the other. It could also be that insight is a real thing, and the other is an illusory manifestation of several real components, like insight, that we gloss over with a word like intelligence.

I believe that insight is a concrete real thing. And that by utilizing your skills at being insightful over enough time, you begin to 'appear' intelligent to other people. But that this 'intelligence' is not always attainable because application of a learned skill is harder to perform than raw talent.

The link between a concrete trait like insight and the ambiguous phenomenon like intelligence seems to be experience. And this makes sense, learning has a large part to play in whether someone is considered intelligent, or smart. The concept of raw intelligence is a lie perpetrated by society that is not only untrue, but harmful.

.

It's not just a matter of why bother keeping something going, like the concept of intelligence, when it doesn't help us in any way. It also hinders us greatly. The intelligence industry is booming: games and apps and pills and other quick fix techniques designed to boost and strengthen and tone and create intelligence. The efficacy of these methods is irrelevant. What matters is that people buy into it and that they do it because their inner monologue is telling them that their intelligence is deficient. And most importantly, their self esteem suffers because of it.

When a person's self esteem suffers because of an unfixable problem, it has systemic issues that permeate all other parts of their life. They experience anger, resentment, jealousy, depression, and anxiety. They are more willing to engage in and go back to abusive relationships, stay in jobs that make them miserable, and eat food that is effectively garbage.

If I was going to point a single cause for many of the issues that plague our society today, it would be that the expectation for people to be smarter is extraordinarily high. And it has implications that ripple through the whole of everybody's lives.

All for something that definitely exists but no one is sure how to make it better, replicate it, or even talk about it.

.

So why after all of this are humans so obsessed with it? There's really no easy answer.

It might be because it's legitimate and it's what separates us vainly from other life. It might have religious origins as a type of divine 'gift' that we still want to be true. It might be a crock that just makes universities, book publishers, scientists, researchers, and psychologists gobs of money. All at the same time dissolving people's (society's) self worth from the inside. It could be any of these things.

What's for certain is that it has avoided a proper definition for millennia and it's the sole source of heartache for a lot of otherwise happy, confident, competent people. For the foreseeable few decades it will continue to move the human saga forward (or just move it somewhere).

Good thing we're intelligent enough to make up something as useful and beneficial as intelligence.